Gattica is a Ruby library for talking to the Google Analytics API.

= Installation
Install the gattica gem using github as the source:

  gem install cannikin-gattica -s http://gems.github.com

When you want to require, you just use 'gattica' as the gem name:

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'gattica'

= Introduction
It's a good idea to familiarize yourself with the Google API docs: http://code.google.com/apis/analytics/docs/gdata/gdataDeveloperGuide.html
  
In particular there are some very specific combinations of Metrics and Dimensions that
you are restricted to and those are explained in this document: http://code.google.com/apis/analytics/docs/gdata/gdataReferenceDimensionsMetrics.html

See examples/example.rb for some code that should work automatically if you replace the email/password with your own

There are generally three steps to getting info from the GA API:

1. Authenticate
2. Get a profile id
3. Get the data you really want

= Usage
This library does all three. A typical transaction will look like this:

 gs = Gattica.new({:email => 'johndoe@google.com', :password => 'password', profile_id => 123456})
 results = gs.get({ :start_date => '2008-01-01', 
                    :end_date => '2008-02-01', 
                    :dimensions => 'browser', 
                    :metrics => 'pageviews', 
                    :sort => '-pageviews'})

So we instantiate a copy of Gattica and pass it a Google Account email address and password.
The third parameter is the profile_id that we want to access data for.

Then we call +get+ with the parameters we want to shape our data with. In this case we want
total page views, broken down by browser, from Jan 1 2008 to Feb 1 2008, sorted by descending
page views.

If you don't know the profile_id you want to get data for, call +accounts+

 gs = Gattica.new({:email => 'johndoe@google.com', :password => 'password'})
 accounts = gs.accounts

This returns all of the accounts and profiles that the user has access to. Note that if you
use this method to get profiles, you need to manually set the profile before you can call +get+

 gs.profile_id = 123456
 results = gs.get({ :start_date => '2008-01-01', 
                    :end_date => '2008-02-01', 
                    :dimensions => 'browser', 
                    :metrics => 'pageviews', 
                    :sort => '-pageviews'})
                    
When you put in the names for the dimensions and metrics you want, refer to this doc for the 
available names: http://code.google.com/apis/analytics/docs/gdata/gdataReferenceDimensionsMetrics.html
  
Note that you do *not* use the 'ga:' prefix when you tell Gattica which ones you want. Gattica
adds that for you automatically.

If you want to search on more than one dimension or metric, pass them in as an array (you can
also pass in single values as arrays too, if you wish):
                    
  results = gs.get({ :start_date => '2008-01-01', 
                     :end_date => '2008-02-01', 
                     :dimensions => ['browser','browserVersion'], 
                     :metrics => ['pageviews','visits'], 
                     :sort => ['-pageviews']})
                     
== Notes on Authentication
=== Authentication Token
Google recommends not re-authenticating each time you do a request against the API. To accomplish
this you should save the authorization token you receive from Google and use that for future 
requests:

  ga.token => 'DSasdf94...' (some huge long string)
  
You can now initialize Gattica with this token for future requests:

  ga = Gattica.new({:token => 'DSasdf94...'})
  
(You enter the full token, of course). I'm not sure how long a token from the Google's ClientLogin
system remains active, but if/when I do I'll add that to the docs here.

=== Headers
Google expects a special header in all HTTP requests called 'Authorization'. This contains your
token:

  Authorization = GoogleLogin auth=DSasdf94...

This header is generated automatically. If you have your own headers you'd like to add, you can 
pass them in when you initialize:

  ga = Gattica.new({:token => 'DSasdf94...', :headers => {'My-Special-Header':'my_custom_value'}})
  
And they'll be sent with every request you make.
  
= Output
When Gattica was originally created it was intended to take the data returned and put it into
Excel for someone else to crunch through the numbers. Thus, Gattica has great built-in support
for CSV output. Once you have your data simply:

  results.to_csv
  
A couple example rows of what that looks like:

  "id","updated","title","browser","pageviews"
  "http://www.google.com/analytics/feeds/data?ids=ga:12345&amp;ga:browser=Internet%20Explorer&amp;start-date=2009-01-01&amp;end-date=2009-01-31","2009-01-30T16:00:00-08:00","ga:browser=Internet Explorer","Internet Explorer","53303"
  "http://www.google.com/analytics/feeds/data?ids=ga:12345&amp;ga:browser=Firefox&amp;start-date=2009-01-01&amp;end-date=2009-01-31","2009-01-30T16:00:00-08:00","ga:browser=Firefox","Firefox","20323"
  
Data is comma-separated and double-quote delimited. In most cases, people don't care
about the id, updated, or title attributes of this data. They just want the dimensions and
metrics. In that case, pass the symbol +:short+ to +to_csv+ and receive get back only the
the good stuff:

  results.to_csv(:short)
  
Which returns: 

  "browser","pageviews"
  "Internet Explorer","53303"
  "Firefox","20323"

You can also just output the results as a string and you'll get the standard inspect syntax:

  results.to_s
  
Gives you:

  { "end_date"=>#<Date: 4909725/2,0,2299161>, 
    "start_date"=>#<Date: 4909665/2,0,2299161>, 
    "points"=>[
      { "title"=>"ga:browser=Internet Explorer", 
        "dimensions"=>[{:browser=>"Internet Explorer"}],
        "id"=>"http://www.google.com/analytics/feeds/data?ids=ga:12345&amp;ga:browser=Internet%20Explorer&amp;start-date=2009-01-01&amp;end-date=2009-01-31", 
        "metrics"=>[{:pageviews=>53303}], 
        "updated"=>#<DateTime: 212100120000001/86400000,-1/3,2299161>}]}
        
= Limitations
The GA API limits each call to 1000 results per "page." If you want more, you need to tell
the API what number to begin at and it will return the next 1000. Gattica does not currently
support this, but it's in the plan for the very next version.

The GA API support filtering, so you can say things like "only show me the pageviews for pages
whose URL meets the regular expression ^/saf.*?/$". Support for filters have begun, but according
to one report, the DataSet object that returns doesn't parse the results correctly. So for now,
avoid using filters.

= The Future
A couple of things I have planned:

1. Tests!
2. The option to use a custom delimiter for output
3. Automatically handle paging (the API only returns 1000 results at a time). Gattica will request
   one result set, see how many pages there are, then do several calls until all pages are retrieved
   or it hits the limit of the number of results you want and return all that data as one big block.
4. Create a nice syntax for filters
